---
layout: post
title: '3. Basic data types'
hero: https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/61VTZh0P8QL._SL1000_.jpg
---

Most pograms deal with data. After all they are instructions for machines
to do things for us, to manipulate stuff for us. A lot of stuff is data.

There are a few common data types (or classes). Hopefully you can see the class/object
concept at play here.

# Integer

`1, 5, 0, -4` are all integers. These are of the type/class Integer, because they each:
- have their own integral values, and
- they can perform integer stuff, like adding, subtracting, exponentiating, etc.
```scala
1 + 5
>> 6

0 * -4
>> -4

5 ** 3 // 5 to the power of 3
>> 12
```

# Float

`0.3, 0.666666, -1.4, 3.1415` all are floats. These are of the type/class Float, because they each:
- have their own values, all consisting of a decimal point.
- they can perform float number stuffs (very similar to the integer actions)

```

```

Float, Double and Decimal are very similar. In most programming languages, they differ only in their precision, ie. the
smallest value that they can represent. For our purposes in this article, you may treat them as the same thing.
{: .notice}

# Number

In some languages, the Integer and Float are subclasses of Number (looking at you, Ruby.) So we can say that
`1, 0.3, 5, -4, -1.4` are all Numbers. Some are Integer numbers and some are Float numbers. (Just to recap
class inheritance)

# Boolean

A special type to represent `True` or `False`. They can do boolean stuffs, like boolean operations: NOT, AND, OR, NAND, NOR, etc.
Booleans are absolutely essential to writing any useful programs.

# Character

`'a'`, `'文'`, `'é'`, `' '`(empty space), `'*'`, `'🐔'`, are characters. They represent a letter or symbol in some writing system.
`'a'` and `'A'` are different characters, even though it may be useful in practical comparison to consider them equivalent.

Notice the quotation around the characters: `'3'` and `3` are different things altogether; one is the arabic representation of the other.
Each character, being of Character type, represents some value, and can do some Character stuff (hopefully you get the Class idea now)

# String

If we put a number of characters together in sequence, they can form words and sentences.
`"This article is awesome"` consists of stringing together 23 characters; it's called a String. (wow)
On top representing some value (the content itself), a string also has a length. Our example string has a length of 23.

It can do string stuff like concatenating with another string: `"My name is" + "Awesome"` gives us a new string `"My name is Awesome"`

# Array

Turns out it's common to have to put a sequence of Numbers together as well.
In fact, a sequence of any objects can be represented.
We have general construct to deal with a sequence of everything: Array.

In many languages, String is basically an Array of characters.
They just get a special name because they're used so commonly.

An array of 20 integers is an object that can contain 20 integers. It has a length, and can be concatenated with other array of integers.
An array of 40 students, holds 40 instances of the class Student. We can define a class to have an array of 40 students, for example.
